FILE: d:\Work\Others\Padmanabhan\astanin1996.pdf
Total pages: 6


--- PAGE 1 ---
Model for grain boundary sliding and its relevance
to optimal structural superplasticity
Part 2 - Evidence for cooperative grain/interphase
boundary sliding and plane interface formation
v. v.
Astanin, S. N. Faizova, and K.A. Padmanabhan
A Zn-22 wt-%Al alloy was superplastically deformed inthe optimal range to obtain experimental evidence based on scanning
electron and transmission electron microscopy for mesoscopic grain/interphase boundary sliding and plane interface formation
thatfacilitates the cooperative boundary sliding process. It was seen that such localised shear surfaces hadformed inthe entire
specimen bulk inaninterconnected manner. At boundaries thatformed part ofacooperative shear surface the triplejunctions
had migrated to anear 1800 orientation. Mesoscopic grain/interphase boundary sliding appeared to be accommodated by local
boundary migration brought about by diffusion at intercrystalline boundaries and lattice dislocation motion at interphase
interfaces inaccordance with the requirements of the model presented inPart 1. MST/3075
©1996 The Institute of Materials. Manuscript received 2 June 1994; infinal form 6 July 1995. Dr Astanin and Ms Faizova
are at the Institute ofMetals Superplasticity Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russia, and Professor Padmanabhan
is at the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India.
Plane interface formation needed for mesoscopic (cooper-
Introduction
ative) sliding is caused at an intercrystalline boundary by
local boundary migration brought about by diffusion. (If
Models for structural superplastic flow available in the the boundary obstacle is severe, local boundary migration
literature1-6 consider sliding along individual grain bound- may also result from non-rate controlling lattice dislocation
aries only and in many cases the analysis is two- motion as occurs at interphase interfaces (see below).)
dimensional. In recent times it has become clear that as a However, at an interphase> interface this can only be
result ofits complex spatial configuration a grain may have brought about by non-rate controlling lattice' dislocation
boundaries that are located favourably for sliding and motion originating at interphase boundary obstacles or
others at which grain/interphase boundary sliding isdifficult regions of high curvature.12
or absent. According to Karl Popper, a good theory must contain
Cooperative sliding at grain/interphase boundaries in an element that can be either proved or disproved by a
which a number of grains slide as an entity along shear direct experiment, i.e. the theory should have 'the quality
surfaces located in different regions of the bulk of the of falsifiability'.13 In the present case the plane interface
specimen has been reported.7- 10 These surfaces are produced needed for mesoscopic sliding should form in the first
by the joining together of grain boundaries that are instance and when this involves an interphase boundary,
oriented favourably to the maximum shear stress directions lattice dislocation motion should be a concomitant of this
in the deforming specimen. Sliding of grains along surfaces process. Experimental evidence concerning the formation
has been examined by Raj and Ashby,!1 but their analysis of the interface needed for mesoscopic sliding is presented
involves considerable diffusional accommodation for which below.
there is no experimental support in superplastic flow.
Further, they regard diffusional accommodation as the rate
controlling process while the contemporary view favours
Material and experimental procedures
grain/interphase boundary sliding as the rate determining
mechanism in superplasticity (see Part 1(Ref. 12)).
Grain/interphase boundary sliding isatwo scale phenom- In order to obtain an optimal microstructure, 10mm thick
enon.12 At the atomic level, sliding at a boundary operates ingots of the Zn-22 wt-O/oAI alloy were water quenched
on a microscopic scale. Steric hindrance makes this kind from 623 K and during the period of spontaneous heat
of sliding relatively ineffective in bringing about large release from spinodal decomposition were rolled down to
plastic deformation without help from additional mechan- a thickness of '"0·6 mm. Specimens (14'0 x 5·0 x 0·6mm)
isms. Such atomic scale boundary sliding is common in were prepared by filing, and annealed at 523 K for 2·5h. A
high temperature creep, where it leads to cavitation, triple stable two phase microstructure with an average grain size
point cracking, and premature failure. If boundary sliding of 1·1Ilm was obtained. For making quantitative measure-
is to be as extensive as that seen during superplastic flow, ments, marker lines along and transverse to the extension
sliding of the order of a grain diameter and more must be axis were introduced using diamond paste.
present (referred to in Part 1 (Ref. 12) as 'meso scopic The specimens were tensile tested on an Instron universal
sliding'). testing machine at a temperature of 523 K and an initial
Mesoscopic sliding gives rise to a predictable long range strain rate of 6·9 x 10-3 s-t, which corresponded to the
threshold stress which has to be overcome by the applied optimal conditions for superplasticity in this alloy.4,6 To
stress, in addition to the short range internal stresses arising maximise the relief, a thin film of carbon was applied on
from microscopic sliding. It is these internal and threshold the specimen surface by vacuum deposition. This film broke
stresses that are responsible for regions I and IIa of at the sites of intense deformation, revealing them as bands
superplastic flow4 having different strain rate sensitivity of contrast when examined in an SEM.
indices (m values) even though both these regions are After a pre-determined degree of deformation, reference
controlled by the same physical processes (see Part 4 for points were introduced into the specimen using a diamond
numerical results). indentor and the region between the reference points
Materials Science and Technology June 1996 Vol. 12 489

--- PAGE 2 ---
490 Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 2
7
1 2
6
5
N
I
b~ E
4
2:
~
en
(wJ) 3
a:
I-
(J)
Z
t
1
Q
aalong tensile axis; bacross tensile axis; cat 45°to tensile axis
0
Schematic diagram showing measurement of angles
between adjoining grain boundaries in different 0 10 20
directions
ELONGATION, %
2 Dependence offlow stress on specimen elongation in
photographed in an SEM. A layer of two to three grains initial stage of extension
in thickness was removed by electrolytic polishing and'
another photograph of the same region at this depth was
taken in the SEM. The two photographs were compared stage at which a continuous network in three dimensions
by superposition and the traces of cooperative grain/ of the cooperatively slid bands had formed.14 A rigorous
interphase boundary sliding bands were identified. Similar analysisforthisunsteady region offlowwould beextremely
photographs were used to measure the angles between complex and has yet to be given~However, a simplified
the adjoining members of the boundary chains, along quantitative description was presented some time ago.is
the tensile direction, in the transverse direction, and at 45° At an elongation of 3·0% (corresponding to the end of
to the tensile axis. The scheme of measurement is shown stage (i) above) at the optimal strain rate, thin (0·1~m),
in Fig. 1. winding shear bands 15-20 ~mlong began to appear along
To determine the structure at a high magnification, thin grain boundaries at a distance of 5-8 ~m apart (Fig. 3a).
foilswereprepared at - 60°Cby electrop'olishing in a 100/0 The bands were arranged across the specimen from one of
solution of HCI0 in ethanol. The foils were examined in its edges to the other. They were not distributed hom-
4
a JEM-2000 type TEM. ogeneously in the sheet plane but were concentrated in
certain areas. At places in the specimen where such
concentrations of shear bands were present, macroscopic
neckswereseen.The displacements ofmarker linescrossing
Results these bands revealed evidence for the relative shear of one
group ofgrains with respect to another along the direction
From thetrue stress-elongation data fortheZn-22 wt-%AI of the bands, i.e. the shear bands were the result of
alloy (Fig.2) and similar results for other systems reported cooperative grain/interphase boundary sliding.8- io
in the literature, two regions are clearly discernible: To establish that the above changes were indeed due to
(i) a region where the true stress a depends strongly on deformation, an SEM image of an undeformed sample is
the true strain e shown in Fig. 3b for comparison. The shear band formed
(ii) a region where the strain dependence of stress is in Fig.3a by cooperative boundary sliding appears to be
weak (the region of stable flow). The mechanical normal to the stress axis. That this is not really so can be
response in these two regions correlated well with seen from the schematic shown in Fig.3c. What is seen in
the details ofboundary shear band formation. Fig. 3a is the trace in the plane bounded by the specimen
The microstructural changes present in the initial region of length and breadth ofthe cooperatively slidboundary that
deformation in which the stress was strongly dependent on is at approximately 45° to the stress axis in the plane
the strain were described earlier.9,14 In this range, flow bounded by the specimen length and thickness. The
commenced at very low stresses and no visible elastic appearance of the cooperatively slid boundaries in three
(a ex:e) deformation was present. Bands of intense shear dimensions was described earlier.9,14
deformation due to cooperative grain/interphase boundary Evidence ofcooperative boundary shear band formation
sliding were seen to develop (see below). The rapid rise in after an elongation of 2000/0 was observed even after
the flow stress correlated well with the increase in the removal of a surface layer by electropolishing, which
number and dimensions of these directional, cooperatively implied that along these lines of cooperative boundary
slid bands. This process continued until a steady state sliding the angles between adjoining boundaries differed
(in terms of both the number and the dimensions of significantly from the equilibrium value of 120°and in fact
these bands) was reached, beyond which point the strain approached 180°, i.e. the boundaries had become less
dependence ofthe flow stress became very weak. angular or a nearly straightened chain had formed as a
The formation of each band of mesoscopic sliding result ofcooperative boundary sliding(Fig.4).Data on the
involves overcoming a long range threshold stress (Part 1). angles at triple junctions measured in different directions
So,·it is understandable that the stress required to enforce are shown in Fig.5 while their mean values and those of
deformation increased with strain until these bands reached the 'saw tooth' parameters for mesoscopic sliding, which is
their steady state number and dimensions, i.e. until that described more fully in the following section, are given in
Materials Science and Technology June 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 3 ---
Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 2 491
a
4 Microstructure after 200% elongation and removal of
surface layer by electropolishing: arrows indicat.e
bands ofcooperative grain/interphase boundary shear
that are identified by superposition of photographs of
same region before and after electropolishing; tensile
axis isvertical
plane interface formation (i.e. an interphase interface was
involved), the process continued by dislocation motion
through the f3 grain which appears to have given rise to a
low angle boundary within the f3 grain (indicated by a
concentration of dislocations) for continuing cooperative
sliding. Grain boundaries that formed part of a coopera-
tively slid boundary band often looked like 'fringes' while
the other boundaries had a smooth appearance.
Discussion
.. Interface
••.....--'"
_ of CGBS
The present results concerning cooperative (mesoscopic)
grain/interphase boundary sliding are best understood in
I! /;. /// . / S di h re e c a t r ion terms ofFig. 1ofPart 1.12In that analysis the polycrystal-
line structure on a mesoscopic scale isdescribed as a cubic
Z
Cn dense packing of equisized spheres. The walls of the
Wigner-Seitz cellcontaining one sphere represent the grain
boundaries. This corresponds to a face centred cubic
structure on a mesoscopic scale. Since roughness islowest
••..• 1 ~....--. •.•
on the {Ill} planes, these are assumed to be the glide
I---- """'lIIIIf----~-..- ..---..:::::.-.
I -- planes for long range (mesoscopic)sliding.The surface ofa
I Traces of CGBS {Ill} plane in the mesoscopic structure consists of a
regular arrangement of peaks and troughs whose height,
I ~ regardless ofgrain shape, willvary as L, the average grain
L ,
size. The problem of plane interface formation along the
.... .;.-.:---.-.Frontal surface mesoscopic {Ill} plane has been treated mathematically
(c) /" of specimen in Part 1.12
Initially slidingcommences at boundaries that experience
3 a Boundary shear relief in initial stage of specimen
extension: arrows show bands of cooperative grain the largest shear stresses. Here again, sliding willbe easier
boundary shear, tensile axis isvertical; bSEM picture whenthegrain boundary misfitisgreater. In Zn-22 wt-%AI
of undeformed specimen for comparison; cschematic and some other two phase alloys, sliding at interphase
diag'ram illustrating why shear band in a appears interfaces is easier than along intercrystalline bound-
normal to stress axis: CGBS=cooperative grain
boundary shear
Table 1 Average values of angles at triple junctions and
'saw tooth' parameters: for definitions of sand
Table 1. It was also evident that after an elongation of h: see Fig. 6b
200% chains of f3 phase grains had formed as part of the
cooperative grain/interphase boundary sliding bands Average angle at
(Fig.4). Direction triple junctions,
(see Fig. 1) deg h,* Jlm s,Jlm
Figure 6a shows a TEM image of a specimen deformed
up to the onset of steady state flow. A cooperative a 122 0'43 1'56
grain/interphase boundary sliding band is present along b 123 0'40 1'43
one of the diagonals of this figure. The location where a c 142 0'30 1'62
triple junction has migrated to form a near plane interface *Represents aregion near the grain boundary disturbed by deformation
isindicated byan arrow. Where af3 phase grain interrupted and should not be confused with grain boundary width.
Materials Science and Technology June 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 4 ---
492 Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 2
(b)
6 aTransmission electron micrograph corresponding to
3% elongation: arrow indicates where triple junction
hasmigrated to form near plane interface; bschematic
diagram for formation in initial stage of extension of
cooperatively slid grain/interphase boundary band
cause cooperative boundary sliding observed here is not
predicted by the analysis of Kaibyshev et al.6,18 Moreover,
theconcept ofachange inthedegreeofthenon-equilibrium
aries.16-18This isverified in the present study where it has nature of a boundary when a lattice dislocation enters it,
been seen above that f3 phase grains are aligned along the has yet to be quantified.
cooperative boundary sliding bands (Fig.4). In the analyses by Ashby and Verrall1 and Raj and
According to Kaibyshev and co-workers,6,18 lattice Ashby the starting two-dimensional array consists of
ll
dislocations that originate at a grain boundary traverse the regular hexagons of uniform size.However, inthe present
grain and are absorbed at an opposite bounda'ry, making experiments at a number of sites the grain shape was
it of a 'more non-equilibrium' nature. This process makes irregular and the angle at triple junctions significantly
sliding easier and faster ('stimulated grain boundary differed from 120°. Figure 6b is a schematic representation
sliding'). As the number of such dislocations can be ofa region similar to that shown in Fig.6a. Evidently, as s
expected to increase with stress (strain rate), it may be increases and/or h decreases, sliding between a pair, of
argued that superplasticity will be more significant in grains can be more easily transferred to an adjoining pair
region II than inregion I.Whiletheevidencefordislocation ,of grains to cause cooperative grain/interphase boundary
motion commencing from a boundary and traversing the sliding. However, a point such as b in Fig.6b would
grain to become absorbed at an opposite boundary found correspond to the grain boundary discontinuity involving
in the present experiments (Fig. 6a) can be reconciled with an interphase interface discussed in Part 1.12To continue
the above view, the plane interface formation needed to cooperative sliding and plane interface formation beyond
Materials Science and Technology June 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 5 ---
Astanin etat. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part2 493
a-b to a-c, lattice dislocation motion will have to
commence at the boundary at b, traverse the f3 grain, and Conclusions
become absorbed at the boundary at c. Such a process is
indeed seen in Fig.6a. It is pertinent to note at this stage 1. Experimental evidence shows that superplasticity
that using TEM it isnot possible to determine ifthe lattice in Zn-22 wt-%AI alloy is the result of interconnected co-
dislocation motion observed in Fig.6a is non-rate con- operative sliding along localised shear surfaces situated
trolling. This can only be determined by texture results throughout the volume of the specimen. This shear is
based on a study oftrue crystallite orientation distribution accomplished by cooperative grain/interphase boundary
functions. It has already been shown that under optimal sliding involving a number of boundaries that slide to-
conditions of superplastic flow, texture intensity decreases gether as an entity. On the specimen surface coopera-
continuously as a result of boundary sliding and grain tive boundary sliding manifests itself as wavy, localised
rotation, and there is no evidence for crystallographic slip shear bands.
acting as an independent rate controlling mechanism (see, 2. Along boundaries that give rise to cooperative
for example, Fig. 10of Ref.19). Thus it can be concluded grain/interphase boundary sliding, triplejunctions move to
that what is observed in Fig.6a is evidence for plane nearly 180° to orient themselves favourably to the shear
interface formation involving an interphase interface by stresses that result from the external load. Boundaries that
non-rate controlling dislocation motion through the f3 are conducive to easy sliding, e.g. high angle boundaries,
grain, which is in accordance with the requirement of the boundaries of large misfit ('more open boundaries'), and
model presented in Part 1.12In other words, the model interphase interfacesintheZn-22 wt-%AI alloy,participate
presented in Part 1passes the test based on 'the quality of preferentially in the cooperative grain/interphase boundary
falsifiability'13(see 'Introduction' above). sliding process.
In contrast, the curvature present at an intercrystalline 3. When plane interface formation involvesan interphase
boundary is removed by local boundary migration caused interface, cooperative sliding is accommodated by dislo-
by diffusion. (If the boundary obstacle is severe, this can cation motion through the lattice and this provides direct
alsobeachieved bydislocation motion,'asdescribed above.) experimental support for the model proposed in Part 1.12
The energy needed to form the plane interface can be 4. Cooperative grain/interphase boundary sliding results
estimated usingequations (33)and (34)and therelationship in an increased number ofnon-equilibrium triple junctions
L1W;=L1lt2/2=L1Vli, as defined in Part 1. Likewise the that meet at angles significantly different from 120°.This
long range threshold stress to be overcome before a plane observation is indicative of local boundary migration
interface can form can be obtained from equations (caused by diffusion at intercrystalline boundaries and
(36)-(38). It is also clear that in Fig.6b the ground area lattice dislocation motion at interphase interfaces) being
indicated in terms ofsin cross-section varies as L2and the present as a process that accommodates boundary sliding.
height h to be removed before a plane interface can be
formed varies as L, where L isthe grain size.
Plane interface formation, as described above, will also Acknowledgements
be present in section d-c ofFig.6b.Asin the model,12this
process can take place simultaneously in a number of
This paper isdedicated to Professor K. Lucke who recently
regions of the deforming specimen, when the plane inter-
celebrated his 75th birthday.
faces a-c and d-c meet, the stress concentration at
This work was supported under the integrated long term
c will be reduced by a local boundary smoothing (migra-
programme of collaboration in science and technology
tion) process brought about by diffusion. Then, as experi-
between the Department of Science and Technology, the
mentally observed, the surfaces along which cooperative
Government ofIndia, and theRussian Academy ofSciences.
boundary sliding is present will acquire a wavy or curved
One of the authors (KAP) thanks the above authorities
appearance (Fig. 3).
for facilitating a short visit to Ufa. The encouragement
From the present results it is also clear that the grain
of Dr P. Rama Rao and Professor O. A. Kaibyshev
boundaries inwhich the dissociation ofthe absorbed lattice
is gratefully acknowledged. This paper was finalised
dislocations isincomplete acquire a fringelike appearance.
when KAP was at the TH Darmstadt, Germany, as a
In Fig.6a, one ofthe grains meeting at a triple junction
'Forschungspreistdiger' of the Alexander-von-Humboldt-
(indicated by an arrow) has migrated so as to extend the
Stiftung, Bonn.
plane interface causing cooperative boundary sliding. The
presence of such local boundary migration (caused by
diffusion at an intercrystalline boundary and non-rate
References
controlling lattice dislocation motion at an interphase
interface, asdescribed inPart 112),that leads to cooperative
boundary sliding on an extensive scale is a unique feature 1. M.F.ASHBYand R. A. VERRALL:Acta Metall., 1973,21,149.
of superplastic flow which is absent in high temperature 2. J. W.EDINGTON, K. N. MELTON,and c. P.CUTLER: Prog. Mater.
creep in which atomic scale grain boundary sliding is Sci., 1976,21,61.
also present. 3. R. c. GIFKINS: J.Mater. Sci., 1978,13,1926.
The limitations of the Ashby-Verrall1 and Raj-Ashby 4. K. A. PADMANABHAN and G. J. DAVIES:'Superplasticity'; 1980,
ll Berlin, Springer Verlag.
analyses, both of which treat diffusional flow as the rate
5. I.I.NOVIKOVand v. K. PORTNOY:'Superplasticity ofalloyswith
controlling process, have already been discussed.4•6 Of ultrafine grains'; 1981,Moscow, Metallurgia (in Russian).
special relevance are the two results presented in Fig.6a, 6. o. A. KAIBYSHEV:'Superplasticity ofalloys,intermetallides and
neither of which can be accounted for by the above ceramics'; 1992,Berlin,Springer Verlag.
diffusion based models, i.e. plane interface formation 7. v. V. ASTANIN,R. Z. VALlEV,and s.N. DUDINA: in Abstracts of
involving several grain/interphase boundaries which makes 3rd All-Union Conf. on 'Superplasticity of metals', Tula,
them behave as an entity, and the evidence for accommo- Russia, 1986,Part 1,17(in Russian).
dation of sliding at an interphase interface by dislocation 8. v. V. ASTANIN,O. A. KAIBYSHEV,and s.N. FAIZOVA:Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR, 1991,319,1366.
motion to cause cooperative boundary sliding in the
9. v. V. ASTANIN,O. A. KAIBYSHEV,and s.N. FAIZOVA:Scr. Metall.
optimal range ofsuperplastic flow.These observations are,
Mater., 1991,25,2663.
however, essential features ofthemodel presented in Part 1. 10.M. G. ZELlN, M. R. DUNLAP, R. ROSEN, and A. K. MUKHERJEE:
Numerical verification of the proposals is presented in J.Appl. Phys., 1993,74,4972.
Part 4. 11.R. RAJand M.F.ASHBY:Metall. Trans., 1971,2, 1113.
Materials Science and Technology June 1996 Vol.12

--- PAGE 6 ---
494 Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 2
12. K.A. PADMANABHANAND J. SCHLlPF: Mater. Sci. Technol., 1996, 16.T. WATANABE,M. YAMADA,S. SHIMA, and s. KARASHIMA:Phi/os.
12,391-399~ Mag.A, 1979,40A,667.
13.R. W. CARN; in 'Advances in physical metallurgy', (ed. 17. P. G. PARTRlDGE, D. S. McDARMAID, and A. W. BOWEN: Acta
J. A. Charles and G. C. Smith), 195; 1990, London, The Metall., 1985,33,571.
Institute ofMetals. 18. R. Z. VALlEV, O. A. KAIBYSHEV, V. V. ASTANIN, and
14.v.V.ASTANIN,O.A. KAIBYSHEV,and s.N. FAIZOVA:Acta Metall. A. K. EMALETDINOV: Phys. Status Solidi raj, 1983, 78,
Mater., 1994,42,2617. 439.
15.R. K. YADAVAand K. A. PADMANABHAN:Mater. Sci. Eng., 1979, 19.K. A. PADMANABHAN: Trans. Indian Inst. Met., 1992, 45,
37,127. 357.
New from The In$titute ofMaterials
THE PROFESSOR ANTHONY KELLY SYMPOSIUM
ADVANCED MATERIALS
IN THE
MARKETPLACE
Edited by
J.E. CASTLE and M. J. KELLY
Contribu tions by
Professor Rustum Roy Professor A. G. Evans
Dr J. Morton Dr M.A. Kinsella Dr J. S.Campbell
Dr M.J. Goulette Professor D. C. Phillips Dr A. D. Batte
Dr A. R.Begg Professor R.Clift Dr D.A. Melford
Mr G. H. Sage Dr E.D. Hondros
Sir Geoffrey Allen
Book 609ISBN0901716928246mm x172mm 224pp
ED:£55/Members £44
Non-ED $110/Members $88
p&p £3.50ED/$8.00 non-ED
Orders to:The Institute ofMaterials, Accounts Department, 1Carlton House Terrace,
London, SW1Y5DB Tel:01718394071 Fax:0171839 2078
Materials Science and Technology June 1996 Vol. 12
