FILE: d:\Work\Others\Padmanabhan\mst.1996.12.7.545.pdf
Total pages: 7


--- PAGE 1 ---
Model for grain boundary sliding and its relevance to
optil11alstructural superplasticity
Part 3 - Effect of flo\N localisation and specil11en
thicl<ness on superplasticity in alloy Supral 100
v. v.
Astanin, K.A. Padmanabhan, and S. S. Bhattacharya
The effect offlow localisation and specimen thickness on the superplastic deformation ofthe commercial alloy Suprall 00
(AI-6Cu) isdiscussed. Optimal flow was accompanied by theformation and spread of intense 'shear bands' along
grain/interphase boundaries. The spacing between the shear bands depended on both the strain rate ofdeformation and the
specimen thickness. Superplasticity drastically decreased when the specimen thickness fell below about 10grain diameters.
The apparent activation volume was afunction ofstrain rate but was independent ofspecimen thickness, while the strain rate
sensitivity index depended on both the strain rate and specimen thickness. The results are explained interms of the theory that
as well asbeing influenced by specimen geometry, the degree ofsuperplasticity depends on the extent to which cooperative
boundary sliding and boundary shear bandformation are present duringflow. MST/3076
© 1996 The Institute of Materials. Manuscript received 2 June 1994; infinal form 6 July 1995. Dr Astanin is at the Institute
ofMetals Superplasticity Problems, Russian Academy ofSciences, Ufa, Russia and Professor Padmanabhan and DrBhattacharya
are in the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (lIT), Madras, India.
superplastic tensiletesting system.Thecontrol specimenwas
Introduction
r~moved from the furnace just before the start ofdeforma-
tion. Only the results from those specimens which had
Supral 100is a commercial superplastic alloy used exten- reproducible microstructures wereusedforfurther analysis.
sivelyin sheet thermoforming. The superplastic properties Superplastic tensile tests were carried out on a Schenck
of this alloy have been well documented.1 In the thermo- Trebel electromechanical testing machine at a temperature
forming of sandwich structures the sheet may become of 450°C and an initial strain rate of 1·4x 10-3 S-1
extremely thin and give rise to failure in service.It is also (constant crosshead speed tests) which lay in the region of
known that the deformation behaviour of extremely thin optimal superplastic flow.1 Tests for comparison were
sheets of superplastic alloys is different from that of thick also carried out at strain rates of 1·4x 10- 2 and
sheets.2 To the best ofthe present authors' knowledge, the 1·4x 10-4 S-1 in regions III and I ofsuperplastic deforma-
deformation behaviour of very thin sheets of Supral 100 tion, respectively. Microstructural studies were carried out
alloy has not been studied. It is ofpractical importance to using a Leitz Metallovert optical microscope. Metallo-
understand the deformation behaviour since superplastic graphic specimens wereprepared by polishing on a buffing
forming will be unsuccessful when the sheet thickness is wheel using diamond paste and subsequently etching
below acertain value.Therefore, astudy ofthedeformation with freshly prepared Keller's reagent. Unetched polished
behaviour of very thin sheets of this alloy was conducted specimens were used to observe deformation relief. Fine
to determine why the superplastic properties are altered scratches present on the surface ofthe specimens were used
when the sheet thickness is drastically decreased. A as marker lines to measure the shear deformation at
comparison was also made with the behaviour of thicker boundaries. Strain rate jump tests were carried out at 25,
specimens. The difference in the deformation behaviour of 100,and 400% strain to determine the strain rate sensitivity
the two types ofspecimens isaccounted for. index m. The apparent activation volume V* wasestimated
using the wellknown relationship
3
In8)
Material and experimental procedures V*=kT (0 (1)
o(J L,T
where 8is the true strain rate, is the true stress, L is the
Cold rolled sheets of Supral 100 (supplied by Alcan (J
grain size,k isBoltzmann's constant, and T isthe absolute
International, UK) were used. The sheets were 2-2'1 mm
temperature of deformation. The subscripts indicate the
thick in the as received condition and had a composition
variables that were kept constant.
(wt-0/0) of AI-5'99Cu-0'002Mg-0'06Si-0'16Fe-0'03 3Zn-
0·004Ti-0·39Zr. Strips were cut from the sheets and rolled
down further at room temperature using carbide rolls to
Results
thicknesses of 0·20, 0·10, 0·08, and 0·06mm. Two micro-
structural conditions were developed by heat treatment.
Annealing for 30min at 450°C (723K) gave an average MECHANICAL BEHAVIOUR
two-dimensional grain sizeof2·5±0·3Jlm,while annealing The mechanical behaviour ofSupral100, in particular that
for 75min yielded an average two-dimensional grain size of material with a grain size of 2·511m, was found to be
of3·5±0·311m. (It must benoted that testing ofsuperplastic similar to that found earlier. From the literature1 it is seen
materials in the laboratory at 450°C requires about 30min that for a material of grain size 2·5Jlm, a strain rate of
for temperature equilibriation, whereas industrial and 1·4x 10-3 S-1 falls in the range of optimal superplastic
technological processes usually take about 1 to 1·5h for flow.In the present work it can be seenfrom the values of
the stabilisation of temperature.) For the sake ofcompari- elongation to failure b and strain rate sensitivity index m
son,acontrol specimen(whichdidnot undergo anydeform- for both thick and thin specimens with a grain size of
ation) was also placed inside the furnace surrounding the 3·511m (Table 1) that a strain rate of 1·4x 10-3 S-1 does
Materials Science and Technology July 1996 Vol. 12 545

--- PAGE 2 ---
546 Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part3
change with further strain, the strain needed to reach
14-
steady state flow increased with the specimen thickness.
12- For specimens with smaller grain size,the stress increased
continuously with strain (flow hardening arising mainly
from microstructural evolution/grain coarsening). Figure 2
shows the variation of b, m, and V*, as functions of
specimen thickness.
h=2mm
(:1 The value of b decreased sharply when the thickness of
*
h=O.2mm the specimen was below 100 Jlm (Fig.2a). For the alloy
h:O.06mm with a grain size of 3·5Jlm, at a specimen thickness of
r;;
60-80 Jlmb was less than 1000/0 and the value of m was
lessthan 0·3.Theseobservations indicate that thesuperplas-
tic behaviour had decreased drastically. For the same
conditions, the change in V* was negligible. The value of
V* was slightly lower for the alloy with a grain size of
3·5Jlmcompared with that for the alloy with a grain size
of 2·5Jlm(Fig.2c).Although V* appeared to be virtually
independent of specimen thickness, the results given in
Table 1show that V* was clearly dependent on the strain
rate ofdeformation.
h=2mm MICROSTRUCTURES
(:I
From an observation of the microstructure of the control
h=O.2mm
:1: specimen, it became clear that the Supral alloy had fine,
h:O.06mm
r;; equiaxed grains. Theintermetallic particles werenot present
,~ aschains but weredistributed randomly. Beforesuperplastic
deformation the grain boundaries were not clearly visible
~ U ~~ ,. . ' (b) even when freshly prepared Keller's reagent was used for
o 20 I 40 60 so '100 etching. (Such a situation is typical of aluminium alloys
s,%
which do not have afullyrecrystallised microstructure.1,4,5)
In most cases the grain boundaries were more darkly
a2'5 Ilm grain size; b3'51lm grain size etched after deformation. By careful observation of
Stress-strain plots for Supral 100specimens of given the microstructure and the etching characteristics after
thickness h for given grain size: test temperature deformation, it was possible to determine the 'active' (i.e.
450°C,initial strain rate 1'4x 10-3 S-1 where the deformation was concentrated) and the 'passive'
grain boundaries, since the active boundaries were more
fall within the optimal range of superplastic flow. Typical darkly etched than the passive ones.
stress-strain plots are shown in Fig. 1. It could be seen The overall microstructure of the specimen following
from these plots that further study was necessary with deformation was as previously reported.1 Grain elongation
regard to the initial portion ofthe stress-strain curve where in the tensile direction, grain growth, and nucleation of
the stress increases sharply with strain, and the steady state cavities were seen in the microstructure. These results are
region of superplastic flowwhere the stress remains nearly given in Table2.In addition, a fewnew observations were
constant with strain. made in this study. It was seen that the active boundaries
From Fig. 1it was seen that the increase in stress with formed interlinked bands that were inclined to the tensile
strain in the early part of the stress-strain curve was axis.In these bands, the boundaries had a very small angle
dependent on the thickness of the specimen being tested. of inclination between each other. The grain boundaries
With decreasing thickness, the stress rose more sharply appeared to be aligned along the direction of these 'shear
with strain. This effectwas clearly seen in specimens with bands'. (In the literature these have also been described as
a grain size of 3·5Ilm(Fig. 1b). In specimens with a grain 'deformation bands', but the term shear bands is to be
size of 2·5Jlm (Fig. 1a) the effect was less significant: the preferred because in crystallographic terminology deforma-
stress-strain curvesforthetwothicker specimenspractically tion band has a distinct meaning.6) Microcavities resulting
coincided in the early part of the stress-strain curve (and from deformation werenucleated at these grain boundaries
in fact in the region beyond) and the flow curve for the
specimen of intermediate thickness was lower than those
Table2 Average number of grains atfailure within each
for the other two thicknesses. A possible explanation for
domain bounded by interlinked microcavities in
this is discussed below. Conversely, for the coarser grain
specimens of given thickness: test temperature
size specimens, where a steady state was reached, i.e. the 450°C, initial grain size 3'5 Jim,initial strain rate
stress reached a constant value beyond which it did not 1'4 x 10-3 S-1
Average Average No. of
Table1 Variation of elongation at fracture ~,strain rate Specimen Elongation grain size domain grains per
sensitivity index m, and activation volume V* thickness, atfracture atfracture size domain
Ilm b,% d,llm H,llm HId
for specimens of given thickness h (mm)
deformed at given initial strain rates: test 2100 540 7'7 79 10·2
----- t - em - perature 450°C,initial grain size3'5 Jim 2100 542 5'4 47 8'6
220 225 5'5 65 11·8
b,% m V*, nm3 220 392 5'6 63 11'3
Initial strain 120 208 5'6 63 11'3
rate, S-1 h=2 h=0'2 h=2 h=0'2 h=2 h=0'2 100 260 5'9 45 7'6
80 78 5'6 58 10'3
1'4 x 10-2 292 101 0'35 0'23 0'779 1'093 70 57 7'7 85 11·0
1'4 x 10-3 540 225 0'43 0'49 1'602 1'405 60 215 5'1 50 9'8
1'4 x 10-4 400 163 0'78 0·36 5'452 5·930 60 175 5'5 45 8'2
Materials Science and Technology July 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 3 ---
Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 3 547
(a)
600
cf2.
~
oZ400
~
<.9
Z
o
....J
W 200
o
o 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
E0.8 (b)
X
w
o
Z
~ 0.6
:>
i=
r~ ' rg====================::::::J:l=D
4
acooperatively slid boundary bands inclined to tensile axis indicated
«Z
by arrows; bshear band with cavitation indicated by arrows
0.2
a:: 3 Microstructures of Supral 100: average initial grain
el-n
size 3'5 Jim,test temperature 450°C, initial strain rate
1'4 x10-3 s-1,specimen thickness 2'1 mm, tensile axis
o runs vertically up page
o 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
At high strain rates, the degree of cavitation was less and
(c)
the cavities were also distributed more uniformly. At lower
3
ME strain rates, cavitation wasmore pronounced and networks
c ofcavity linked bands wereclearly visible(Fig.4).On large
* deformation the microcavities coalesced to form elongated
>
w macrocavities. These macrocavities were aligned along the
~
tensile direction. Beforefracture thesemacrocavities caused
=> 2
....J a significant reduction in the cross-section ofthe specimen
0
> and gave the specimen volume the appearance of being
Z partitioned into different domains. The average cross-
0
i= sectional size of these domains at the moment of fracture
«
was 8-12 grain diameters (Table 2).
> 1
i= For the thin specimens the grain size was non-uniform
u
« after deformation. Bands offinegrains ofabout 6Ilm with
boundaries that etched dark were observed. These bands
were separated by regions of grains with boundaries that
o etched poorly. In profile, well formed macronecks and
o 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 shear bands were visible (Fig. 5). When the thickness of
SPECIMEN THICKNESS, ~m the specimen was reduced, cavitation also decreased.
o3'5 Jlm grain size; D 2'5 Jlm grain size Fracture took place when the thickness of the specimen
was about 10grain diameters. Further insight was gained
2 Variation of a percentage elongation to failure ~, b
strain ratesensitivity index m, andcactivation volume when the deformation relief of the prepolished specimen
V*, with specimen thickness in Supral 100: test was studied after a strain ofabout 4-7%, i.e.in the region
temperature 450°C,initial strain rate "4 x10-3 S-1 just before the onset ofsteady state superplastic flow.Thin
wavy lines which covered the boundaries of several grains
were visible on the surface of the specimen (Fig. 6). These
lines seemed to be predominantly at 90°to the tensile axis.
and appeared as bands or arrays of bands inclined to the As explained in Part 2,7 with· the aid of Fig.3c of that
tensile axis. This could easily be seen when the specimen paper, the lines are the trace on the specimen
wasviewedunder an optical microscope (Fig. 3).Figure 3a, (length xwidth) plane of a boundary shear band inclined
which is at a higher magnification than Fig.3b, reveals at 45° to the stress axis in the (length x thickness) plane.
evidence for two cooperatively slid boundary bands that Horizontal as wellas vertical displacements of the marker
are shown by two mutually pointing arrows. Figure 3b lines were observed on the wavy lines. Table 3 gives the
shows a wide shear band containing a number of cavities. frequency with which these bands were observed.
Materials Science and Technology July 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 4 ---
548 Astanin atal. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 3
4 Microstructure showing cavity linked bands at the
boundaries of dark etched grains indicated by arrows:
average initial grain size 3'5Jim, test temperature
450°C, initial strain rate 1'4x10-4s-1, specimen
thickness 2'1mm, tensile axis vertical up page
Discussion
Deformation localisation during superplastic flow was
found by one of the present authors in a model Zn-
22wt-%AI alloy.8Therefore, it was decided to extend the
study to a commercial superplastic alloy, namely, Supral
100.As noted in the introduction, for successful thermo-
6 Deformation relief of prepolished specimen after 5-4%
forming ofsandwich structures, the behaviour ofvery thin
strain: wavy lines covering several grain boundaries
specimens has to be understood, and so the scope o~the
that are indicative of development of cooperative
work was extended to include the effect of specImen
boundary sliding are indicated by arrows:. average
thickness. initial grain size3-5Jim,test temperature 450°C, initial
Supral 100 is processed to develop a fine grain micro- strain rate 1'4 x 10-3 s-1, specimen thickness 0-07 mm,
structure by strain enhanced recrystallisation in the early tensile axis runs vertically up page
stages of superplastic flow, as the pinning of subgrain
boundaries by ultrafine ZrAl precipitates confers on this
3 structural evolution.) Thus, the conclusions that in the
material a very high resistance to static recrystallisation.9
early part of the stress-strain curve the stress rose more
The variable amount of cold deformation imparted to the
sharply with strain with decreasing specimen thickness, and
specimens in the present study to obtain different thick-
that the strain needed to reach steady state flowincreased
nessescould have influenced the static and strain enhanced
with specimen thickness, are based on measurements
recrystallisation behaviour. Therefore the results have to
corresponding to a single grain size (3'5Jlm). The con-
be interpreted carefully.
clusions with regard to the effects of specimen thickness
A comparison of Fig. 1a and b reveals that true steady
on £5,m, and V* (see section on 'Mechanical behaviour'
state flow conditions were established only when initial
above), however, appear to be valid for both grain sizes,
static recrystallisation had been sufficientlylong to obtain
notwithstanding the microstructural evolution present in
a starting grain sizeof 3·5Jlm (Fig. 1b). (In Fig. 1a there is the material with starting grain sizeof2·5 Jlm.
continuous flow hardening, which is indicative of micro-
It could be argued that in thinner tensile specimens the
effectsofinhomogeneities, e.g.thickness and compositional
variations, would be relatively more significant, and that
for a critical cross-section at failure a smaller reduction in
area only would be necessary. This can account for the
lower value of £5and the earlier peaking of the true stress
as a function of true strain in the case of the thinner
specimens. However, the higher flow stresses at a fixed
strain observed for the thinner specimens (Fig. 1b) can not
easily be explained by this line ofargument, particularly in
Table3 Average distance between boundary shear
bands along longitudinal and transverse
directions of tensile specimen: test temperature
450°C, initial grain size 3-5Jim, specimen
thickness 0-07 mm
Average distance between shear bands, Jlrn
Initial strain
5 Well developed macronecks and shear bands, rate, S-1 Longitudinal direction Transverse direction
indicated by pairs of arrows, in profile: average initial
grain size3'5 Jim,test temperature 450°C, initial strain 0-014 9-8 12-5
rate =1'4 x 10-3 s-1, specimen thickness 0'06 mm, 0·0014 14·8 18·2
0-00014 17-4 23-5
tensile axis is horizontal
Materials Science and Technology July 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 5 ---
Astanin et al. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 3 549
view of the results in the literature that the strength of very 10 grains thick the shear bands need not be as long as in
thin material is greater than that of thicker sections. thicker specimens, but the results, which are presented in
Further experimental work is necessary before it can be Table 2, do not provide support for this argument. Thus,
unequivocally established that the material properties are at least in the range of thicknesses presently studied, the
changed perceptibly when the specimen sections are very minimum length of the shear bands formed seems to be
thin. For the present, it is suggested that this possibility independent of specimen thickness.)
can not be ruled out. When the specimen thickness dropped to less than about
As the microstructural stability during· superplastic flow 10grain diameters, superplasticity was drastically decreased
was greater when the starting grain size was 3·5 Jlm than and the fracture of the specimen was similar to that seen
when it was 2·5 Jlm, further observations were made using during conventional high temperature fracture. (Scanning
only the 3·5 Jlm grain size (see Tables 1-3 and Figs. 3-6). electron microscopy studies of this will be reported
From the present experimental data as well as the elsewhere.) This conclusion could also be drawn from the
previously published results1 the formation and spread of microstructure of the fractured sample in which the
intense shear bands at grain boundaries during optimal specimen thickness was less than 10 grain diameters (see,
superplastic flow has been clearly demonstrated. for example, Fig. 10 of Paton and Hamilton10). This
In the initial stage of deformation, plane interfaces that observation explains why the elongation decreased when
connected two or more grain/interphase boundaries during the specimen became thin. In the case of thick specimens,
optimal superplastic flow, and bands that were the result the overall thickness was less important than the cross-
of cooperative boundary sliding, formed at different places section of the specimen ligaments, i.e. the area between
in the tensile specimen surface as well as in the interior of large interlinked cavities. Similarly, the distance between the
the specimen. Over a significant distance, such a band voids or holes, as in the experiments of Tait and Taplin, 11
appeared as a wavy interface inclined to the loading and between the reinforced fibres in the case of composites,
direction. (A number of plane interfaces of shorter length became extremely important compared with the bulk
joined together and became smoothed during further sliding thickness of the specimen.
to give the wavy appearance of the shear bands (see When the number of shear bands was large enough for
Part 2).7)This interface comprised parts ofgrain boundaries continual cooperative boundary sliding to be achieved, the
that were oriented favourably to the maximum shear stress steady state flow region of superplasticity sets in. In this
direction. This was evident from the deformation relief condition the shear bands were transformed into macro-
studies of the surface of the specimen and the micro- bands along which intense deformation took place (the
structural analysis in the bulk of the deformed specimen, boundary sliding equivalent of Chernov-Liider's bands).
in particular from the difference in the etching character- The width of these bands was of the order of a few grain
istics of different grain boundaries. It is known that diameters. In these bands, apart from boundary sliding,
the degree of etching of grain boundaries is dependent on rotation of grains and cavitation were also seen. From the
the energy of the boundaries. When the energy is greater, shape of the cavities and their linkages, it was clear that
the grain boundaries are etched more darkly. Boundaries extensive deformation also took place along these bands in
with high energy are more mobile in general and more the interior of the specimen. Between these bands were
suitable for grain/interphase boundary sliding compared zones that underwent only a relatively small degree of
with boundaries oflower energy, e.g.small angle boundaries deformation. The number of the bands and the size of the
and special boundaries. It is known that the energy of a passive zones depended on the strain rate of deformation
boundary can increase as a result of grain/interphase and the thickness of the specimen. When the strain rate or
boundary sliding. Thus, it may be concluded that the dark the thickness of the specimen was reduced, there was a
etching (high energy) interconnected boundaries were the greater degree of non-uniform. deformation. (With a
result of cooperative boundary sliding. These boundaries decrease in strain rate (i.e. stress), the number of grain
tended to become aligned more or less linearly along a boundaries at which the critically resolved shear stress
shear band and facilitated continual cooperative boundary necessary to bring about cooperative boundary sliding was
sliding (see Part 2, Ref. 7). It is at these favourably oriented available, decreased.) Further work is necessary to include
boundaries that sliding started. An increase in the applied the flow localisation reported here quantitatively into the
stress would be necessary to overcome the local stress mechanistic model presented in Part 1.12
concentrations created at unfavourably oriented boundaries It is seen from Table 1 that V* is a function of the
in order to facilitate the continuation of cooperative applied strain rate and that it increases with decreasing
boundary sliding along those boundaries. strain rate. If superplasticity is explained in terms of
When the volume of the specimen was large, the stimulated boundary sliding and the movement of grain
probability of the development of favourably configured boundary dislocations, as has been done by Kaibyshev and
shear bands for continual boundary sliding was high, and co-workers,9,13 then it could be suggested that, at lower
therefore the rate of increase in stress with deformation in strain rates (or stresses), fewer lattice dislocations will
the initial stage ofdeformation was low. When the thickness originate at a boundary and traverse the grain to be-
of the specimen was about 10-20 grain diameters, the come absorbed at an opposite boundary. Thus, the grain
probability of generating a favourable configuration for boundary structure is disturbed to a lesser extent and V*
cooperative boundary sliding was reduced and so the rate is larger. At higher strain rates more lattice dislocations
of increase of stress with deformation was higher. This will run into the opposite boundaries and stimulate sliding.
makes sense because a higher stress would be necessary for This process will reduce the size of V*. This approach has
cooperative boundary sliding to take place along the yet to be quantified.
reduced number of bands available in the specimen. Using In contrast, in the approach of Padmanabhan and
this argument it becomes possible to explain qualitatively Schlipf,12 from their equations (12) and (30) the strain rate
e
the differences in the initial part of the stress-strain curves during optimal superplastic flow sp is given by
o
H
b
o
t
w
ai
e
n
v
e
e
d
r, i
f
t
or
mus
d
t
iffe
b
r
e
en
e
t
mph
s
a
p
s
e
i
c
s
i
e
m
d
en
that
thic
th
k
i
n
s
ess
a
e
rg
s
ume
(
n
F
t
ig.
o
1
n
b
ly
).
8
.
s
(
p=2vexp
----!y1F;ro)
L
W 8
k
6
T
VO
holds good for the case of cooperative boundary sliding, as
a minimum of about 10 grains initially in the through x {( (In
thickness direction ofthe specimen appeared to be necessary <T- <To{ 1+ a <T~m<T 0 - 1)] + <T,a} (2)
for cooperative sliding to take place in a significant manner.
(It is possible to argue that when the specimen is less than where ('J.. =2/ArrY2and 0\= (jm exp(-}o1C1/2/2), and (jm and
Materials Science and Technology July 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 6 ---
550 Astanin et a/. Grain boundary sliding in structural superplasticity: Part 3
A are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, ofthe thickness of the specimen. When the specimen thickness
internal stress distribution resulting from mesoscopic was lessthan about 10grain diameters, cooperative sliding
cooperative sliding. (For other definitions see Ref.12.)As and boundary shear band formation became difficult and
equation (1) defines V* as equal to kT(o Ini./o(J), it follows this led to a significant decrease in superplasticity.
that in this analysis 3. The apparent activation volume is independent of
specimen thickness asitisan indicator ofthemicromechan-
ismofboundary slidingwhichdoesnot depend onspecimen
thickness. However, the activation volume isdependent on
the strain rate ofthe deformation and this can beexplained
in two different ways.
4. The strain rate sensitivity index m depended on the
. (3) specimen thickness as well as the strain rate as it is a
measure of the degree to which cooperative boundary
Sincethe strain rate isa function of (J, it isnatural that V* sliding is present during superplastic flow. This explains
depends on both f;and T.The activation volume willreflect
why m is relatively low in high temperature power law
theproperties ofthebasicunit ofsliding(anoblate spheroid
creep deformation even though boundary sliding is pres-
ofvolume ~ defined in Ref.12)via A and but it should
(Jm, ent. This is because in creep cooperative boundary
not be identified with ~. The latter would be obtainable
sliding/boundary shear band formation is not significant
experimentally onlyfromamore sophisticated measurement
and so coherent strain can only be produced with the aid
or theoretically from atomistic calculations based on
of an additional low strain rate sensitive mechanism, e.g.
molecular dynamics. (The dependence of ~ on i. and T is
dislocation motion. This leads to a lowering ofthe overall
yet to be determined.)
m value in high temperature creep.
It can also beseenfrom Fig.2cthat V* remains relatively
unchanged whenthespecimenthickness ischanged, whereas
m isdependent on specimen thickness. This isexplained by
the fact that V* concerns the micromechanism ofboundary
sliding, which is independent of the thickness of the Acknowledgements
specimen being tested. However, m is indicative of the
degree of cooperative boundary sliding, i.e.plane interface This paper is dedicated to the memory of Professor
formation (see Parts 1 and 2, Refs.12 and 7), and the J. Schlipf.The material used in this study was supplied by
formation of networks of shear bands to ensure smooth Dr Roger Grimes ofAlcan Ltd, UK. The financial·support
and continual sliding over large areas. Sincethe formation was derived from the Integrated Long Term Programme
of these bands is dependent on the thickness of the of Cooperation in Science and Technology between the
specimen (see above), it can easily be seen that m would be Government of India's Department of Science and Tech-
strongly dependent on the thickness ofthe specimen,which nology (DST) and the Russian Academy of Sciences.One
iswhat has been observed. It isnoted at this stage that the of the authors (VVA) thanks the DST and the Russian
propensity for neck formation changes with specimen Academy of Sciences for enabling him to work at IIT
thickness. Therefore, this geometric factor willalso have to Madras. The authors are grateful to Dr P. Rama Rao and
be considered when deriving expressions for the effect of Professor O. A. Kaibyshev for encouragement. A very
specimen thickness on the value of m. (In the model of useful discussion with Professor J. Schlipf on the concept
Padmanabhan and Schlipf, m can be obtained from of activation volume is acknowledged. This paper was
equation (29) of Ref.12(m=n-1). The effectof specimen finalised when one of the authors (KAP) was at the TH
thickness on the value of m is yet to be included in this Darmstadt, Germany, as a 'Forschungspreistrager' of the
analysis.) Therefore, a major conclusion of this study is Alexander-von-Humboldt-Stiftung, Bonn.
that V* is a measure of the micromechanism of boundary
sliding,whereas m isameasure ofthe extent ofcooperative
sliding present in the deforming specimen. This explains
why in the case of high temperature power law creep of
References
alloys, although boundary sliding ispresent and V* isalso
nearly of the same order as that for superplastic flow,the
value ofm israther low.Evidently, this isdue to the degree 1. R. H. BRICKNELL and J. w. EDINGTON: Metall. Trans. A, 1979,
of cooperative sliding being considerably less during high lOA, 1257.
temperature power law creep than during optimal super- 2. v. V. ASTANINand A. A. SERINKO:!ZV. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Met.,
plastic flow. For coherent deformation in the former case, 1990, 4, 132.
in addition to boundary sliding less strain rate sensitive 3. J.H. GITTUS:'Creep, viscoelasticity and creep fracture in solids',
355; 1975, London, Applied Science.
dislocation processes will also be necessary and this will
4. B. M. WATTS,M. J. STOWELL, B. L. BAIKIE, and D. G. E. OWEN:
lower the overall value ofm.
Met. Sci., 1976, 10, 189.
5. B. M. WATTS,M. J. STOWELL, B. L. BAIKIE, and D. G. E. OWEN:
Met. Sci., 1976, 10, 198.
Conclusions 6. G.E.DIETER:'Mechanical metallurgy', 137,534; 1988, Singapore,
McGraw-Hill.
7. v. V. ASTANIN, K. A. PADMANABHAN, and s. S. BHATTACHARYA:
1. Intense shear bands formed and spread along
Mater. Sci. Technol., 1996, 12, (6), 489.
grain/interphase boundaries during optimal superplastic 8. v. V.ASTANIN,O.A.KAIBYSHEV,and s.N. FAIZOVA:Acta Metall.
flow. This is attributed to cooperative boundary sliding Mater., 1994,42,2617.
involving a number of grain/interphase boundaries. This 9. o. A. KAIBYSHEV:'Superplasticity of alloys, intermetallics and
process, which connects the differently oriented bounda- ceramics', 76-84; 1992, Berlin, Springer Verlag.
ries by sliding to form a continuous network in which 10. N. E. PATON and c. H. HAMILTON: Metall. Trans. A, 1979,
deformation becomes concentrated, is responsible for the lOA, 241.
strong dependence ofstress on strain in the early stages of 11. R. A. TAITand D. M.R. TAPLIN: Scr. Metall., 1979, 13, 77.
12. K. A.PADMANABHANand J.SCHLlPF: Mater. Sci. Technol., 1996,
superplastic flow.
12, (5), 391.
2. The spacing between the boundary shear bands was
13. R. Z. VALlEV, O. A. KAIBYSHEV, V. V. ASTANIN, and A. K.
a function of both the strain rate of deformation and the EMALETDINOV:Phys. Status Solidi (aj, 1983,78,439.
Materials Science and Technology July 1996 Vol. 12

--- PAGE 7 ---
New from The Institute of Materials
'The
%ly Sma((man Symyosium
TOWARDS THE
MILLENNIUM
A MATERIALS PERSPECTIVE
Contributed papers on
Population increases and technological change; The future of materials in the
market place; Power generation in the 21st century: The challenges for
materials technology; Fast footwork and quick wits - commercialising materials
for the 21st century; Materials technology in the USA;
Towards 1997 - Materials research in Hong Kong with China; Materials for the
new South Africa; Successful materials research and technology in Sweden;
Cost-effective quality enhancement of materials education; Metallurgy - A
digression; Ductility, malleability, education and training; Back to chemistry in
the theory of metals; Permanent magnets: Past, present and future; From the
Schrodinger equation to the rolling mill; Microstructure: From the micro-scale
to the nano-scale; How ordered are intermetallics; Twenty years of diffraction
studies on intermetallic compounds; Electron microscopy at Birmingham;
Microscopy memories; The Santa Catharina Meteorite and low temperature
ordering in iron-nickel alloys; Cast iron - areal advanced material;
From loops to hips; Some simple inventions;
Professor Ray Smallman - Published work 1953-1995; Index
Book 611 ISBN 0901716839 247mm x 174mm
ED:£45 / Members £36
Non-ED $90 / Members $72
p&p£3.50ED / $8.00Non-ED
Orders to:The Institute ofMaterials, Accounts Department, 1Carlton House Terrace,
London, SWI Y5DB Tel: 0171 8394071 Fax: 0171 8392078
N.American orders to: Ashgate Publishing Co., Old Post Road, Brookfield, VT 05036, USA
Tel: 8022763162 Fax: 8022763837
